---
layout: page
title: "Empire Builder"
description: "2026 <br> Cover Photo: Cascades, Washington State"
img: assets/img/travel/covers/202601.jpg
importance: 3
category: North America
giscus_comments: false
---

The mythos of Kurt Cobain has, in the 32 years since his death, far outgrown his corporeal form, as crazy as that would have sounded in the 90s. But dead men tell no tales, and Kurt's cult of personality, and subsequent martyrdom, have led to an almost religious ideation by worshippers of the church of rock-and-roll. For these devout followers, "Mecca" or "Jerusalem" lay right in the Pacific Northwest, in Seattle, Washington, where cracks in the concrete oozed that Seattle sound, and where reliquaries to the prophet Kurt- bits and pieces of him and his life- are strewn through the city in a collection of holy sites. I was born too late to know Kurt Cobain the man, and so I chose to take pilgrimage to the holy city of Seattle to discover both who Kurt Cobain was, and what he still is.

And also to take the Empire Builder... I had done a Pacific-to-Atlantic coast-to-coast overland on Amtrak a few years prior (add cite) where I took the California Zephyr, and since then I had always wanted to try the East-to-West approach, taking the Lake Shore Limited to Chicago and riding the Empire Builder out west. Unfortunately, I booked my itinerary very last minute and the Lake Shore Limited (and the Pennsylvanian) had both sold out, so this journey started at 5 in the morning at the Marine Air Terminal (RIP Spirit) at LaGuardia Airport. 

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/travel/202601/01.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Marine Air Terminal (Terminal A). This used to be the entirety of LGA!
</div>

Last time I passed through Chicago on an Amtrak trip I only had a three hour layover since the Zephyr arrived in Chicago about 3 hours late (not too bad by Amtrak standards!). This time, I had a few more hours so I checked my bag at the Metropolitan Lounge (you get free access if you buy a sleeper ticket) and went to wander around downtown a bit (which, for a Monday morning, was really really empty for some reason). Unfortunately, though, this overland wouldn't start at New York Harbor but rather at the shores of Lake Michigan in Chicago.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/travel/202601/02.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Promenade by Lake Shore Drive. The entire promenade was caked in goose shit...
</div>

Chicago Union Station is the hub of Amtrak's long distance train services, and as such has the nicest lounge besides Moynihan Hall in New York Penn (never been in that one but apparently it's like an airport lounge). There's complimentary coffee, snacks, alcohol, coat check, and even showers. However, you only get free access on inbound sleepers, connections, and in the case of outbound sleepers (like my Empire Builder), you only have access for up to three hours before departure. Honestly, it was cool the first time around because my expectations were just that low, but it's really pretty poor by "premium" lounge standards.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center photo-row">
  <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/travel/202601/03.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1 photo-img" %}
  </div>
  <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/travel/202601/04.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1 photo-img" %}
  </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left: Lunch special personal deep dish at Giordano's by Union Station, since I didn't get to try it the last time I was in Chicago. I can't in good conscience call this place a tourist trap since the whole thing (with salad and soup) was like 10 bucks. Right: Upper level at the Metropolitan Lounge.
</div>

Some details about the train trip: the Empire Builder is a roughly 3,500-km, 2-day-long (without delays) journey from Chicago to Seattle, hugging the Canadian border along most of the route. It's a typical Amtrak long distance route, and you have two options of seating: coach class and sleeper class. Under typical circumstances, I heavily recommend splurging a bit for a sleeper berth. My ticket for the trip cost $634 for a "roomette" (more on that later), which is the cheapest sleeper berth and can seat either one person comfortably or two people fairly uncomfortably. At night, you can fold down the two seats and a sort of Murphy bed above youfor two lie-down beds to sleep in. I always travel in off-peak season, but I don't have anyone demented enough to go on these excursions with me, so my ticket prices are usually in the ~$600 range. If you are travelling with a partner the per-person costs of a roomette can be considerably cheaper (around $500 or so).

As mentioned earlier, sleeper car passengers get complimentary Metropolitan Lounge access at Chicago Union, and about 30 minutes prior to train departure, staff gather up all the sleeper car passengers waiting in the lounge area and lead them to the train (some photos of the consist will be provided later). From there, you walk to your train car, a conductor will check your ticket, and you'll ascend a flight of stairs to end up at your room.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center photo-row">
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/travel/202601/05.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1 photo-img" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/travel/202601/06.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1 photo-img" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left: Empire Builder Schedule. Right: My home for the next two days.
</div>

You can see the layout of a typical roomette. The gray mass at the top of the image is the Murphy bed that you can fold down for a second berth. You can see the two seats underneath. Using a foot pedal you can slide both of those out so that they connect and lie down on it. There's a fold-out tray table that was caked in biological matter that I didn't really use. Each room comes with various reading lights, a supposedly adjustable thermostat, a coat rack, a door that you can close if you don't want to interact with people, and ONE!! electrical outlet that my charging cord would just slide out of immediately. Bring a power bank to be safe! The room dimensions are about 2 meters by 1 meter, so they're not very big, especially for 2 people.

 In general (and more on hygiene later), the rooms are pretty dingy and gross. These Superliner cars are from the late 70s, so there's like 50 years worth of gunk in all the crevasses (and sometimes out in the open) because people eat, vomit, and have sex in these rooms, and the turnaround time on these trains is not nearly enough to give them a deep clean. I would definitely walk around with some sort of foot protection and many people recommend bringing a pack of sanitary wipes (which I did not) to wipe everything down with. The bed linens, pillows, blankets, and towels, though, were all freshly laundered and clean, courtesy of your sleeper car attendant.

Regarding the sleeper car attendant, yeah, you get one, and they're there to make sure that the condition of the sleeper cars don't become unfit for human habitation (which happens on Amtrak sometimes!). They'll also make your bed when you step out for dinner (more on that later) and fold your seats back up when you step out for breakfast in the mornings. They clean the bathrooms, stock the towels for showers, stock the coffee and water (there's complimentary bottled water on the train, I would not recommend drinking anything that comes out of a tap), and are great to talk with. I've had great attendants on both of my trips and if you have a great one on yours (and you'll definitely notice if you don't) then it's customary to slip them a 20 as you disembark at your destination.

Now, regarding food: if you are in a sleeper car you don't have to worry about bringing any food onto the train. You will be very well-fed, because there is a dedicated dining car that is complimentary for sleeper car passengers. Yes, included in your $600 fare are 5 genuinely high-quality meals (quantity depends on the route schedule). I left Chicago in the afternoon and arrived in Seattle around noon two days later, so my ticket included a dinner on the first day, breakfast, lunch, and dinner on the second, and breakfast on the third. The dinner, in particular, is a three course affair (appetizer, main, and dessert), with which you are also given a complimentary alcoholic beverage. You're also allowed to bring alcohol on board if you're in a sleeper berth, by the way, but you have to drink that in your room.

Who is Kurt Cobain? What is Kurt Cobain? All that I can admit to knowing is that thousands had made this pilgrimage before me, each carrying their holy scriptures and sacred offerings- CD sleeves, lighters, cigarettes, guitar picks, personal mementos, words from bleeding hearts poured over rotting wood, laminated photos of dead loved ones who were once fans. And only through a person long since dead and buried could such a vivid tapestry of lives- lived, living, and still yet to live- converge upon this hallowed ground, a solemn communion, an eternal funeral procession, a celebration, defiant.

Who really is Kurt Cobain? Many things to many people, sure, but who really was Kurt Cobain? Well, he was just a man, wasn't he?

"Or do you believe in rock-and-roll? Can music save your mortal soul?"

